---
episode: 031
layout: post
author: John Welch
title: "How to measure marketing"
subtitle: "The performance marketing trap, brand awareness, and marketing does not equal sales"
description: "Marketing cannot be measured the same way that sales is measured. And yet, this is what most business leaders are trying to do. Unfortunately, many marketers have also adopted this approach, rather than educate their customers and set proper expectations."
permalink: "/blog/how-to-tell-if-your-marketing-is-working/"
img: "/uploads/031-how-to-measure-marketing.png"
ttr: "6"
categories:
- strategy

---

<iframe id="ytplayer" type="text/html" width="100%" height="380"
src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/t1vjNMGXqoM?autoplay=1&origin={{ site.url }}"
frameborder="0"></iframe>

## How do I know if my marketing is working?

Marketing cannot be measured the same way that sales is measured. And yet, this is what most business leaders are trying to do. Unfortunately, many marketers have also adopted this approach, rather than educate their customers and set proper expectations. 

* TOC
{:toc}

### It's difficult to measure marketing by revenue

In the sales world, it's easy to directly tie activities to their revenue results. If you have a sales rep and you pay him $120,000/yr and he brings in $750,000/yr in revenue, the math is pretty simple. 

Marketing doesn't work like that. It's only in the past 20 years that digital marketing was even a thing. Before this point, businesses had almost no insight into the effectiveness of their marketing beyond what happened to their sales over time. 

### The marketing data trap

There are some methods of marketing which allow you to see metrics and performance. These methods are getting ALL of the attention.

Using paid ads on Google, you can clearly see how many clicks you received, how much you paid per click, and how many conversions have happened. The same is true for social media ads like Facebook, Instagram, and Pinterest ads. 

For something like branding, it’s [almost impossible to directly tie marketing activities to revenue generated](https://trackmaven.com/blog/how-to-measure-brand-awareness-roi/). 

### How to measure marketing ROI

It’s not impossible to tie things like branding to ROI. To do it you need [accurate data for where your leads come from, how long it takes them to become a customer, and what channels they are using to interact with your brand](https://www.bizible.com/blog/measure-roi-brand-marketing-attribution).

If you have this attributive data you can see how many people typed your URL directly into their browser, this is a measure of brand awareness. 

You can see if the time it takes your leads to convert is decreasing, this is a measure of brand recognition and positive emotional connection with your audience. 

As you connect the dots with your data, you can begin to place a value on each customer you acquire. You can track how your brand awareness campaigns have improved these specific metrics. If there is no appreciable change then what is the point of the brand awareness campaigns? 

At some point, there is one measure of your marketing: did it work? 

If it did, keep doing it. 

If it didn’t stop doing it. 

### Is revenue the best way to measure marketing?

The only reason to market is to grow your business. You need revenue to grow. You need revenue to survive. If your marketing is not generating revenue, your marketing is not working. 

At the same time, “generating revenue” is a vague and abstract concept. Google gets attribution for leads that were generated by a billboard. 

When businesses become obsessed with tying marketing activities directly to revenue, they hurt their marketing efforts. Marketing is more of an art than a science. 

Marketing is being tied too closely to data and math. We’re losing the magic that makes marketing effective. Marketing is primarily a conversation between a business and it’s audience. This isn’t always something you can directly track or measure. 

### Should I Be Doing Marketing?

So, how do you know if your marketing is working? The question answers itself. If you’re asking this question, your marketing isn’t working. Or at least it isn’t working like it could be.

If your marketing isn’t working, chances are good it’s because you’re focusing too much on “performance marketing” and not enough on the art of marketing itself. 

It’s never too late to start doing it right.